welcome to topcast
and for my continuing series on
the fabric of reality we're up to
chapter 2 shadows for what i imagine
will be a
relatively short episode the reason for
that i flagged in a previous episode
because i've already
completed approximately a five part
series
on the multiverse which is essentially
what this is about this chapter is
focused on quantum theory as i've also
said previously and in various other
forums this was
the chapter that had the most profound
impact on me when it came to reading the
fabric of reality
and the reason for that i suppose is
twofold on the one hand
i was struggling when i first read this
chapter to understand quantum theory
i was studying it at university in the
undergraduate level
and we were working through problem sets
and doing exercises
as you do in university physics classes
and
although i could mechanically work
through how to get the answer i didn't
understand what i was doing
i didn't understand exactly what the
schrodinger wave equation for example
was telling me about reality i didn't
understand how to interpret the
experiments one of which david is going
to
explain to us today in which i'm going
to go through again so in this
confusion this haze of disillusionment i
suppose with
the way in which i was being presented
quantum theory
by both my lecturers at university and
by
other popularisers of science who'd
written books on the subject
like paul davies for example who write
some very exciting and interesting books
about
the touch upon at least quantum theory i
never felt like i was
getting an explanation that made any
sense and when i read
the explanation here in chapter two
shadows it
made sense and so that was why it was so
astonishing to me on the one hand and
why it had such a profound
impact on me because he finally for the
first time
i got it i felt as if now i understood
what quantum theory was an explanation
of
what it was telling us about reality
that's on the one hand
on the other hand it was the fact that
what it was telling us about reality was
so astonishing
i kind of knew that it had to be
astonishing in some way shape or form
because i'd read
various other so-called interpretations
and they were
wacky to say the least things like the
human mind or consciousness was somehow
involved in
fundamental physics i didn't like this
it didn't ring true to me because i
didn't think there could be a place
really for something as emergent and
complex
and large as the human brain giving rise
to the mind
on fundamental particles it evoked what
einstein called spooky action at a
distance
i like einstein not to put myself in the
same category but i
rejected this idea i regarded it as
spooky
this idea that if you're observing
something then the experiment goes in
one direction and if you're not
observing something the experiment goes
in a different direction
i felt either this was a pros a claim
about the way in which
light interacted with mata who cares
or it was a weird claim about if you
passively think of something
then that can affect a physical system
somewhere or other
anyway i wasn't buying it i didn't
understand it
but here we actually get the explanation
so i'm going to do an abridged reading
today
of the chapter and go through
the double slit experiment the way that
david puts it in his words and i've done
this before
actually in the beginning of infinity
series but we'll do it again here
because this is the fabric of
reality so here we are chapter 2
shadows and david writes there is no
better
there is no more open door by which you
can enter into the study of natural
philosophy
than by considering the physical
phenomena of a candle
michael faraday a course of six lectures
on the chemical history of a candle
in his popular royal institution
lectures on science michael faraday
used to urge his audiences to learn
about the world by considering what
happens when a candle burns
i am going to consider an electric torch
or flashlight instead
this is quite fitting for much of the
technology of an electric torch is based
on faraday's discoveries
i am going to describe some experiments
which demonstrate phenomena
that are at the core of quantum physics
experiments of this sort with many
variations and refinements
have been the bread and butter of
quantum optics for many years
there is no controversy about the
results yet even now
some of them are hard to believe the
basic experiments are remarkably austere
they require neither specialized
scientific instruments nor any great
knowledge of mathematics or physics
essentially they involve nothing but
casting shadows
but the patterns of light and shadow
that an ordinary electric torch can cast
are very strange when considered
carefully they have
extraordinary ramifications explaining
them requires not
just new physical laws but a new level
of description and explanation that goes
beyond what was previously regarded as
being the scope of science
but first it reveals the existence of
parallel universes
how can it what conceivable pattern of
shadows
could have implications like that
imagine an electric torch
switched on in an otherwise dark room
light emanates from the filament of the
torch's bulb
and fills out part of a cone in order
not to complicate the experiment with
reflected light
the walls of the room should be totally
absorbent matte black
alternatively since we are only
imagining these experiments
we could imagine a room of astronomical
size so there is no time for any light
to reach the walls and return before the
experiment is completed
figure 2.1 illustrates the situation but
it is somewhat misleading
if we were observing the torch from the
side we should be able to see neither it
nor of course it's light invisibility is
one of the more straightforward
properties of light
we see light only if it enters our eyes
though we usually
speak of seeing the object in our line
of sight that last affected that light
okay pausing there just my reflection on
this
yes this can be sometimes surprising to
people who hear it for the first time
that light is invisible
what that means is that if light is
passing in that direction let's say and
not entering your eye
then there's no way that you can
possibly detect it you can't see it
which is why the laser bolts in star
wars
should be invisible now we don't know
what these laser bolts technically
speaking
consist of and star wars might very well
be a magical universe
separated for out from our own operating
via different physical laws
indeed the existence of the force
probably suggests that that is the case
but presuming
that you could indeed have bullets made
of light
coming from stormtrooper guns then you
wouldn't be able to see them unless of
course they're not actually made of
light
which is quite possible after all
they're moving much much slower than
light indeed they're moving much
much slower than typical bullets are so
star wars laser bolts
aren't lasers you can only see stuff
that light reflects off and when you see
stuff what you're seeing are the photons
entering your eye
if a laser is shown from here to there
you don't see the laser beam you know
for example here's my
laser pointer here's me putting the
laser pointer on
you can't see it i can see the little
dot over there if i put the laser behind
me i'm not sure if that'll show up on my
screen
or whatever but here you can probably
see it on my forehead there
now if i point it at you then you can
see it right
so lasers as they go from one place to
another you can't actually see the
photons
so explain those pictures where you can
see the laser light well that's because
you've got some sort of smoke or mist or
something in the room
and it's reflecting off the laser ray
beam whatever you want to call it the
photons of light are crashing into
mata particles particles of dust usually
of some kind or other
so the other thing to say about light
especially light such as comes out of a
normal torch
and this is something we all have
experience with is that if you are
close to the source of light if you're
close to where the
torch is then the torch is bright and
the further you move away from the torch
the more dim it becomes
not surprising and the reason is that
the light is spreading out
over an ever greater area and so it's
getting spread
more and more thinly like butter being
spread over more bread
let me go back to the book at this point
and david ryan's
can light really be spread more and more
thinly
without limit the answer is no at a
distance of approximately ten thousand
kilometers from the torch
its light would be too faint for the
human eye to detect and the observer
would see nothing
that is a human observer would see
nothing but what about an animal
with more sensitive vision frog's eyes
are several times more sensitive than
human eyes
just enough to make a significant
difference in this experiment
if the observer were a frog and it kept
moving further away from the torch
the moment at which it entirely lost
sight of the torch would never
come instead the frog would see the
torch light begin to flicker
the flickers would come at a regular
intervals that would become longer
as the frog moved further away but the
brightness of the individual flickers
would not diminish at a distance of 100
million kilometers from the torch
the frog would see on average only one
flicker of light
per day but that flicker would be as
bright as
any that it observed at any other
frogs cannot tell us what they see so in
real experiments we use
photomultipliers light detectors which
are even more sensitive than frog's eyes
and we thin out the light by passing it
through dark filters
rather than by observing it from a
hundred million kilometers away
okay and then david compares
light to gold you can't thin out light
infinitely there comes a point at which
the light begins to flicker
in a similar way gold is an infinitely
malleable
now i've used this example myself and
it's an interesting psychological
trick that is played on one's mind i
actually thought this analogy
was something that i sort of came up
with but no here it is
gold is mentioned here in the fabric of
reality so i have
absorbed it then only just reading it
here again now do i realize that oh the
reason why i keep using gold as my go-to
example of
what stuff is quantized is because it's
here in the fabric of reality
so if you hammer out a metal the degree
to which you can hammer it out or the
ease with
which you can hammer it out is known as
the malleability
of that material so gold is extremely
malleable
you can spread it so thin of course that
you can get that uh
gold leaf stuff that is extremely thin
indeed but you can't make gold
infinitely thin because you eventually
get down to the gold atom and once you
get down to the gold atom if you were to
try and
break that down still further you would
no longer have gold you'd have
half of a gold atom which is no longer
gold so as david writes and i'll pick up
from where he talks about this
he writes so the only way in which one
can make a one atom thick gold sheet
even thinner is to space the atoms
further apart
with empty space between them when they
are sufficiently far apart it becomes
misleading to think of them as forming a
continuous sheet for example if each
gold atom were on average several
centimeters from its nearest neighbor
one might pass one's hand through the
sheet without touching any gold at all
similarly there is an ultimate lump or
atom of light
a photon each flicker seen by the frog
is caused by a photon striking the
retina of its eye
pausing near my reflection so um what
david's talking about here is of course
quantization this concept that
there is a smallest possible unit of
stuff in the case of gold the smallest
possible unit of stuff is the
gold atom in the case of light it is the
photon of light the smallest particle of
light
in case of electricity the smallest
possible particle is the electron
in the case of water it's the water
molecule and repeat for all stuff that's
made out of matter
anything that appears in the so-called
standard model of particle physics
all the stuff that you can see around
you is going to have
a smallest possible unit of stuff that
makes it up
when i say everything of course i mean
the everything that's made out of pure
substances you
of course see mixtures around you so if
you have in the simplest case um
salt water then the smallest possible
unit of salt water is not
a unit of salt water the smallest
possible unit are two discrete things
one of which is called the
salt lattice well really it's made of
two ions the
sodium and the chloride which are bonded
together by our electrostatic forces
and the water molecule and so these two
things constitute the units out of which
the mixture
salt water is made so a lot of things
you see in your environment of course
are
mixtures including human beings for
example which are made up of
lots of pure substances each of which
have a smallest possible unit
so pretty much everything is quantized
what doesn't appear to be quantized
or what we don't know about the
quantization of are things like gravity
it has been suggested that the standard
model should contain a graviton
i don't know why but this is um just
what
people who want to quantize spacetime or
quantize gravity
talk about they talk about a particle
gravity never been observed
and doesn't appear to explain anything
because we have an explanation of
gravity which is in terms of space time
which is continuously divisible under
that theory under general relativity we
don't have a smallest unit of time or a
smallest unit of space
or a smallest unit of space time etc but
this idea of
quantization in physics within the realm
of quantum physics is the thing that
gives
quantum theory its name there is a
quanta a smallest particle
of something okay so i'm skipping as i
say a number of pages there and i'm
picking up where david says
i have made an assumption about light
namely that it travels only in straight
lines
from everyday experience we know that it
does for we cannot see around corners
but careful experiments show that light
does not always travel in straight lines
under some circumstances it bends
this is hard to demonstrate with a torch
alone just because it is difficult to
make very tiny filaments and very black
surfaces
these practical difficulties mask the
limits that fundamental physics imposes
on the sharpness of shadows
fortunately the bending of light can
also be demonstrated in a different way
suppose that the light of a torch passes
through two successive small
holes in otherwise opaque screens as
shown in figure
2.4 and that the emerging light falls on
the third screen beyond
our question now is this if the
experiment is repeated with ever smaller
holes and with ever greater separation
between the first and second screens
can one bring the umbra the region of
total darkness
ever closer without limit to the
straight lines through the centers
of the two holes can the illuminated
region between the second and third
screens
be confined to an arbitrarily narrow
cone
in goldsmith's terminology we are now
asking something like
how ductile is light how fine a thread
can it be drawn into it turns out
light is not as ductile as gold long
before the holes get as small as a ten
thousandth of a millimeter in fact even
with holes as large as a millimeter or
so in diameter
the light begins noticeably to rebel
instead of passing through the holes in
straight lines
it refuses to be confined and spreads
out after each hole
and as it spreads it frays the smaller
the hole
the more the light spreads out from its
straight line path
intricate patterns of light and dark
shadow appear we no longer see
simply a bright region and a dark region
on the third screen with a penumbra in
between
but instead concentric rings of varying
thickness
and brightness there is also colour
because white light consists of a
mixture of photons of various colours
and each colour spreads and frays in a
slightly different pattern
figure 2.5 shows a typical pattern that
might be formed on the third screen by
white light
that has passed through holes in the
first two screens
remember there is nothing happening here
but the casting of a shadow
figure 2.5 is just the shadow that would
be cast
by the second screen in figure 2.4
if light traveled only in straight lines
there would be only a tiny white dot
much smaller than the central bright
spot in figure 2.5
surrounded by a very narrow penumbra
outside that there would be pure umbra
total darkness
okay pausing there my reflection just
skipping a little bit more
at this point nothing to a
science student in particular a physics
student as i was
20 plus years ago was particularly
surprising in what david had said
it was a little bit idiosyncratic i
thought perhaps that he was invoking
frogs and tortures
and i thought it was a nice harking back
to the fact that yes michael faraday
would explain stuff through
contemplation of the operation of how a
candle produced light and so
that was lovely but so far nothing
particularly
surprising pretty much run-of-the-mill
science and the same kind of way in
which things would be explained
in a clear way with analogies such as
the analogy of
light being quantized to gold being
quantized but now we're about to get
into the part where
as i've said before the sense of vertigo
comes in for anyone who hasn't
heard this description of the experiment
before
much less the explanation which is to
come the description
of the experiment including the result
is rather strange the first part if
you've even done high school physics
won't seem to be that mysterious it is
the double slit experiment
but how it works with single photons
well that is the
challenging part for us so let's dive
straight into it
david writes figure 2.6 shows at roughly
its actual size
a part of the pattern of shadows cast
three meters from a pair of straight
parallel slits
in an otherwise opaque barrier the slits
are one-fifth of a millimeter
apart and illuminated by a parallel
sided beam of pure red light
from a laser on the other side of the
barrier why laser light and not torch
light
only because the precise shape of a
shadow also depends on the colour of the
light
in which it is cast white light as
produced by a torch contains a mixture
of all visible colours so
it can cast shadows with multi-coloured
fringes
therefore in experiments about the
precise shapes of shadows we are better
off
using a light of a single colour we
could put a coloured filter such as a
pane of coloured glass
over the front of the torch so that only
light of that color would get through
that would help but filters are not all
that discriminating
a better method is to use laser light
for lasers can be tuned
very accurately to emit light of
whatever color we choose
with almost no other colour present if
light traveled in straight lines
the pattern in figure 2.6 would consist
simply of a pair of bright bands
one-fifth of a millimeter apart too
close to distinguish on this scale
with sharp edges and with the rest of
the screen and shadow
but in reality the light bends in such a
way as to make
many bright bands and dark bands and no
sharp edges at all
if the slits are moved sideways so long
as they remain within the laser beam
the pattern also moves by the same
amount in this respect
it behaves exactly like an ordinary
large scale
shadow now what sort of shadow is cast
if we cut a
second identical pair of slits in the
barrier interleaved with the existing
pair
so that we have four slits at intervals
of one tenth of a millimeter
we might expect the pattern to look
almost exactly like figure 2.6
after all the first pair of slits by
itself
casts the shadow in figure 2.6 and as i
have just said
the second pair by itself would cast the
same pattern
shifted about a tenth of a millimeter to
the side in almost the same place
we even know that light beams normally
pass through each other
unaffected so the two pairs of slits
together
should give essentially the same pattern
again though twice as bright and
slightly more blurred
in reality though what happens is
nothing like that
the real shadow of a barrier with four
straight parallel slits
is shown in figure 2.7a for comparison i
have repeated below it
the illustration of the two-slit pattern
figure 2.7 b
clearly the four-slit shadow is not a
combination of
two slightly displaced two slit shadows
but has a new and more complicated
pattern in this pattern
there are places such as the point
marked x which are dark on the four slit
pattern
but bright on the two-split pattern
these places were bright when there were
two slits in the barrier but when dark
when we cut a second pair of slits for
the light to pass through
opening those slits has interfered with
the light that was previously arriving
at x so adding two more light sources
darkens the pointed x removing them
illuminates it again
pausing there just my reflection now at
this point i still
uh recall to some extent the excitement
of reading that
even though i didn't know the
explanation yet i'd read that sort of
thing before but probably not quite
as well explained exactly what the
problem was but this idea that
if you open up more places that are like
to come through you actually decrease
the amount of light on the screen
there's more shadows even though you've
got more light sources you
you had two previously two places for
the light to come through
and you had a certain pattern of light
and dark and then you open up
more places for the light to go through
more gaps more slits
and you actually decrease the amount of
light you actually increase the number
of shadows
this seems bizarre it's like opening up
more places for the light to get through
darkens the screen
so this is really mysterious and i don't
know exactly what my psychology was
back at the time of reading this but but
i guess it might have been something
like
i'm about to be given another confusing
account of what's going on here i'm not
going to understand this
i've read about this before i've even
conducted this experiment myself before
and i've had lecturers tell me about you
know the results of the experiment
and what it could mean and i haven't
understood anything about what's going
on
so i guess i had my hopes were pretty
low
for being given a realistic account
a clear account a logical account that
i would be able to actually explain to
other people
after all that's a measure of whether or
not you understand something if you can
actually explain to someone else
such that they then walk away nodding
their head and going on now i also get
it then that means
to some extent that you understand it at
the very least you've convinced yourself
you understand it even if you might have
some misconceptions
okay so backtracking a little bit and
reading on
david wrote these places
were bright when there were two slits in
the barrier but when dark
when we cut a second pair of slits for
the light to pass through
opening those slits has interfered with
the light that was previously arriving
at x so adding two more light sources
darkens the pointed x removing them
illuminates it again
how one might imagine two photons
heading towards x
and bouncing off each other like
billiard balls either photon alone
would have hit x but the two together
interfere with each other
so that they both end up elsewhere i
shall show
in a moment that this explanation cannot
be true
nevertheless the basic idea of it is
inescapable
something must be coming through that
second pair of slits
to prevent the light from the first pair
from reaching
x but what we can find out with the help
of some further experiments first
the four-slit pattern of figure 2.7a
appears only if all four slits are
illuminated by the laser beam
if only two of them are illuminated a
two-slit pattern appears
if three are illuminated a three slit
pattern appears which looks different
again
so whatever causes the interference is
in the light beam
the two slit pattern also reappears if
two of the slits are filled by anything
opaque
but not if they are filled by anything
transparent in other words
the interfering entity is obstructed by
anything
that obstructs lights even something as
insubstantial as fog
but it can penetrate anything that
allows light to pass
even something as impenetrable to matter
as diamond
if complicated systems of mirrors and
lenses are placed anywhere in the
apparatus so long as light can travel
from each slit to a particular point on
the screen
what will be observed at that point will
be part of a four-slit pattern
if light from only two slits can reach a
particular point
part of a sleuth two-slit pattern will
be observed there and so on
so whatever causes interference behaves
like light just pausing there what we
mean by interference is
something affecting that light that
would have struck x
but which didn't so remember in in
figure b
we've got the pattern that happens that
occurs
with two slits and that bit that's
light then goes dark when you add two
more slits
additional places for the light to come
through so something's interfering
with light that otherwise would have hit
x in
picture b now those those photons that
we're heading towards point x
but which don't make it to point x in
figure a
when you've got those two extra slits
has been interfered with something's
interfered with it that's literally the
word
so there's some reason why it hasn't
gotten there when it would have got
there
okay just going back to the book
whatever causes interference behaves
like light
it is found everywhere in the light beam
and nowhere outside it it is reflected
transmitted or blocked by whatever
reflects transmits or blocks light
you may be wondering why i'm laboring
this point surely it is obvious that it
is light
that is what interferes with photons
from each slit is photons from the other
slits
but you may be inclined to doubt the
obvious after the next experiment
the denumont of the series what should
we expect to happen
when these experiments are performed
with only one photon at a time
for instance suppose that our torch is
moved so far away
that only one photon per day is falling
on the screen
what will our frog observing from the
screen see if it is true that want to
diffuse with each photon
is other photons then shouldn't the
interference be lessened when the
photons are very sparse
should it not cease altogether when
there is only one photon passing through
the apparatus at any one time
we might still expect penumbras since a
photon might be capable of changing
cores when passing through a slit
perhaps by striking a glancing blow at
the edge but what we surely could not
observe
is any place on the screen such as x
that receives photons when two slits are
open
but which goes dark when two more are
opened
yet that is exactly what we do observe
however sparse the photons are
the shadow pattern remains the same even
when the experiment is done
one photon at a time none of them is
ever observed to arrive at x
when all four slits are open yet we need
only close
two slits for the flickering at x to
resume
could it be that the photon splits into
fragments
which after passing through the slits
change course and recombine
we can rule that possibility out too if
again we fire one photon through the
apparatus
but use four detectors one at each slit
then at most
one of them ever registers anything
since in such an experiment we never
observe
two of the detectors going off at once
we can tell that the entities that they
detect are not splitting up
so if the photons do not split into
fragments and are not being deflected by
other photons
what does deflect them when a single
photon at a time is passing through the
apparatus
what can be coming through the other
slits to interfere with it
let us take stock we have found that
when one photon passes through the
apparatus
it passes through one of the slits and
then something interferes with it
deflecting it in such a way that depends
on what other slits are open
the interfering entities have passed
through some of the other slits
the interfering entities behave exactly
like photons
except that they cannot be seen
pausing there just my reflection just a
psychological reflection so i think at
this point this is where
the sense of vertigo really begins to
happen it's it's
you're recognizing that he is david is
offering for you served up on a platter
the explanation there are photons there
that you can't see
now at this point you don't understand
the full explanation but you're getting
a hint of it
so everything can be understood at this
point everything is
logical realistic it makes sense
you're not having the wool pulled over
your eyes at no point at least for me
do i have questions and go but wait what
what about what about what about because
he's answering any of the objections i
might have raised
if you have any objections throughout
this please write a
question in the comments because i i
like to talk about this stuff it's um
it's very interesting to try and clarify
if you're not too sure
let's keep going david writes i shall
now start calling the interfering
entities photons
that is what they are but for the moment
it does appear that photons come in two
sorts
which i shall temporarily call tangible
photons
and shadow photons tangible photons are
the ones we can see
or detect with instruments whereas the
shadow photons are intangible invisible
detectable only indirectly through their
interference effects on the tangible
photons
later we shall see that there is no
intrinsic difference between the
tangible and shadow photons
each photon is tangible in one universe
and intangible in all other parallel
universes
but i anticipate what we have inferred
so far
is only that each tangible photon has an
accompanying retinue
of shadow photons and that when a photon
passes through one of our four slits
some shadow photons pass through the
other three slits
since different interference patterns
appear when we cut slits at the other
places in the screen
provided that they are within the beam
shadow photons must be arriving
all over the illuminated part of the
screen whenever a tangible photon
arrives
therefore there are many more shadow
photons and tangible ones
how many experiments cannot put an upper
bound on the number but they do set a
rough lower bound
in a laboratory the largest area that we
could conveniently illuminate with
a laser might be about a square meter
and the smallest manageable size
for the holes might be about a
thousandth of a millimeter so there are
about one
trillion possible hole locations on the
screen therefore there must be at least
a trillion shadow photons accompanying
each
tangible one thus we have inferred the
existence of a seething
prodigiously complicated hidden world of
shadow photons
they travel at the speed of light bounce
off mirrors are refracted by lenses and
are stopped by opaque barriers or
filters in the of the wrong color
yet they do not trigger even the most
sensitive detectors the only thing in
the universe that a shadow photon can be
observed to affect
is the tangible photon that it
accompanies that is the phenomena
of interference well pausing there so
at this point i think i understood
interference and you should understand
interference as well
interference is these photons that you
see
colliding physically colliding with
these photons that cannot be seen
these photons that cannot be seen push
aside
the photons that you can see because if
they weren't there
then the photon would have just
continued off through that
double slit and landed in one of two
places behind
those two slits that's the single photon
version of reality
the classical universe version of
reality that's not what we're in
we're in a multiverse back to the book
we're almost there at
where we have to accept the explanation
of the multiverse
david writes shadow photons would go
entirely unnoticed if it were not for
this phenomena and the strange patterns
of shadows
by which we observe it interference is
not a special property of photons alone
quantum theory predicts an experiment
confirms that it occurs
for every sort of particle so there must
be hosts of shadow neutrons
accompanying every tangible neutron host
of shadow electrons accompanying every
electron
and so on each of these shadow particles
is detectable
only indirectly through its interference
with the motion of its tangible
counterparts
pausing there okay so at this point i
think i accepted the multiverse account
because i knew about doing the twin slit
experiment
with electrons in fact i'd read about
it being done with oxygen atoms so
it's clear it was clear to me at this
time that well not only do you have this
retinue of
photons following around every photon
you can see you have a retinue of
electrons following every electron that
you can detect and oxygen atoms and
therefore you just
conclude that well every single particle
of matter has a retinue of
unseen counterparts so that's it we live
in a multiverse we live
in a universe a reality where much of it
is unseen
which again it's a it's an astonishing
fact but
it's also consistent with the history of
ideas of their universe just getting
larger and expanding
beyond what we can see the scene
in terms of the unseen indeed as david
says going back to the book
it follows that reality is a much bigger
thing that it seems
and most of it is invisible the objects
and events that we
and our instruments can directly observe
are the mirror's tip of the iceberg
now tangible particles have a property
that entitles us to call them
collectively
a universe this is simply the defining
property of being tangible
that is of interacting with each other
and hence of being directly detectable
by instruments and sense organs made of
other tangible particles
because of the phenomena of interference
they are not wholly partitioned off from
the rest of reality
that is from the shadow particles if
they were we should never have
discovered that there is more to reality
than tangible particles
but to a good approximation they do
resemble the universe that we see around
us in everyday life
and the universe referred to in
classical pre-quantum physics
for similar reasons we might think of
calling the shadow particles
collectively
a parallel universe for they too are
affected by
tangible particles only through
interference phenomena but we can do
better than that for it turns out that
shadow particles are petitioned among
themselves in exactly the same way
as the universe of tangible particles is
partitioned from them in other words
they do not form a single homogeneous
parallel universe vastly larger than the
tangible one but rather a huge number of
parallel universes
each similar in composition to the
tangible one and each obeying the same
laws of physics
but differing in that the particles are
in different positions in each universe
okay it's pausing that and this is where
it helped me understand
the schrodinger wave equation which i'd
been learning about because the
shredding a wave equation
gives you the distribution of all the
positions
that a particle can have but you
only ever observe one and previously i'd
of course been taught that well
when you observe this of course is the
collapse of the wave function
and the wave function is the thing given
by the schrodinger wave equation
and you make an observation and then you
find that all of the different
possibilities collapse into the one that
you observe they all the others
disappear
which makes you think why does the
equation describe
all of these other possible positions if
only one of them really exists what is
going on there
then usually you're given the
non-explanation that well this is just
the formalism this just helps you to
predict the outcome of experiments don't
worry it doesn't really mean anything in
actual reality there's no point asking
about actual reality
what this says here is that in fact the
schrodinger wave equation the wave
function
is telling you that all these particles
really do exist before and after before
during and after an experiment is
conducted they really do exist
when you make an observation you find
out in which universe you are
in which universe you occupy you occupy
this one or you occupy that one
but all the others absolutely exist and
they continue to exist
they evolve over time they change over
time the distribution of particles
changes over time but
they all exist okay i'm skipping a part
there where david talks about
terminology this idea of the universe
versus multiverse
um and he writes i'll just go to the bit
where he explains the
a distinction uh quote a new word
multiverse has been coined to denote
physical reality as a whole
single particle interference experiments
such as i have been describing show us
that the multiverse exists
and it contains many counterparts of
each particle in the tangible universe
to reach the further conclusion that the
multiverse is roughly partitioned into
parallel universes
we must consider interference phenomena
involving more than one tangible photon
the simplest way of doing this is to ask
by the way of a thought experiment
what must be happening at the
microscopic level when shadow photons
strike an opaque object
they are stopped of course we know that
because the interference ceases when an
opaque barrier is placed in the parts of
the shadow photons but why what stops
them
we can rule out the straightforward
answer that they are absorbed like
tangible photons would be by the
tangible atoms in the barrier
for one thing we know that shadow
photons do not interact with tangible
atoms
for another we can verify by measuring
the atoms in the barrier or more
precisely
by replacing the barrier with the
detector that they neither absorb energy
nor change their state
in any way unless they are struck by
tangible photons shadow photons have no
effect
to put that another way shadow photons
and tangible photons are affected in
identical ways
when they reach a given barrier but the
barrier itself is not directly
is not identically affected by the two
types of photon pausing there okay
in other words or in my words if you're
shining a torch at the wall we know
already given
david's explanation that coming out of
that torch are the photons you can see
and lots and lots i would say the more
modern understanding of
quantum theory is uncountably infinite
fungible instances of these
other photons are also coming out of the
torch but when it hits a wall an opaque
barrier
the opaque barrier that you can see is
only absorbing the photons that you can
see so how are all the other
shadow photons being absorbed well only
because there must be shadow barriers
there as well
there's a shadow wall there however many
uh
shadow photons are there are that's how
many shadow barriers they are there are
absorbing the photons which leads you
inexorably to the idea that
everywhere there's mata there are
uncountably infinite
copies of that matter existing in a
sense
in the same place at the same time but
i'd refer you to the book
if you need more about this chapter 2 is
certainly worth reading
and i'll just read the final
part of the chapter i've skipped a
a fair bit and i'm ignoring stuff that
david says there about instrumentalism
because i've
concentrated on that before in various
uh
episodes so just the last part of this
chapter and david writes
so far i have been using temporary
terminology which suggests
that one of the many parallel universes
differs from the others
by being tangible it is time to sever
that last link with the classical single
universe conception of reality
let us go back to our frog we have seen
that the story of the frog that stares
at the distant torch for days at a time
waiting for the flicker that comes on
average once a day
is not the whole story because there
must also be shadow frogs
in shadow universes that coexist with
the tangible one
also waiting for photons suppose that
our frog
is trained to jump when it sees a
flicker at the beginning of the
experiment the tangible frog will have a
large set of shadow counterparts
all initially alike but shortly
afterwards they will no longer all be
alike
any particular one of them is unlikely
to see a photon immediately pausing
there
so all of these frogs that are alike
beforehand fungible instances
indeed so the beginning of infinity
sharpens this
notion up with new terminology but it's
the same idea
back to the book david writes any
particular one of them the frogs is
unlikely to see a
photon immediately but what is a rare
event in any one universe is a common
event in the
multiverse as a whole at any instant
somewhere in the multiverse
there are a few instances in which one
of the photons is currently striking the
retina of the frog in that universe
and the frog jumps why exactly does it
jump
because within its universe it obeys the
same laws of physics as tangible frogs
do
and its shadow retina has been struck by
a shadow photon belonging to that
universe
one of the light-sensitive shadow
molecules in the shadow retina has
responded by undergoing complex chemical
changes
to which the shadow frog's optic nerve
has in turn responded
shadow optic nerve it has transmitted a
message to frog's shadow brain
and the frog has consequently
experienced the sensation of seeing a
flicker
or should i say the shadow sensation of
senior flicker surely not
if shadow observers be they frogs or
people are real then the sensations must
be real too
when they observe what we might call a
shadow object they observe that it is
tangible they observe this by the same
means
and according to the same definition as
we apply when we
say that the universe we observe is
tangible tangibility
is relative to a given observer so
objectively there are not two kinds of
photons
tangible and shadow nor two kinds of
frog not two kinds of universe
one tangible in the rest shadow there is
nothing in the description i have given
of the formation of shadows
or any of the related phenomena that
distinguishes between
tangible and shadow objects apart from
the mere assertion
that one of the copies is tangible when
i introduce tangible and shadow photons
i apparently distinguish them by saying
that we can see the former but not the
latter
but who are we while i was writing that
hosts of shadow davids were writing it
too they drew a distinction between
tangible and shadow photons but the
photons they called shadow
included the ones i call tangible and
the photons they call tangible are
among the are among those i called
shadow not only did none of the copies
of an object have any privileged
position in the explanation of shadows
that i just outlined
neither do they have a privileged
position in the full mathematical
explanation provided by quantum theory
i may feel subjectively that i am
distinguished among the copies
as the tangible one because i can
directly perceive myself and not the
others
but i must come to terms with the fact
that all the others
feel the same about themselves many of
those davids
are at this moment writing these very
words some are putting it better
others have gone for a cup of tea
and there we ended and that that as i
say is the most affecting
for me personally of the chapters in
the fabric of reality because
it explains what's going on in this
double-stool experiment
and once you understand that coupled
with this concept of quantization in
quantum theory
you've gone a long way to understanding
quantum theory maybe not the
mathematical formalism
but who cares about that unless you want
to be a professional if you want to
understand reality the best that
everyone who works in physics
understands reality
then after reading shadows you will have
a very good understanding in fact you
might understand it better than some
physicists in fact the physicists who
deny
this uh way of
explaining what we see in terms of the
unseen
for more on this find my multiverse
series
on youtube and until next time
bye
[Music]
um
foreign
[Music]
up